Hardware designs implement the exact functionality without redundant components. The main design goal is the reduction of the logic gates that are required to materialize the cipher. This metric is called Gate Equivalent (GE) [12]. A small GE predisposes that the circuit is cheap and consumes little power. For constrained de-vices an implementation including up to 3000 GE can be considered acceptable while for even smaller devices, like 4-bit microcontrollers, implementations of 1000 GE are being studied [12]. Energy consumption and power constraints are other significant factors. Energy consumption is important when a device is running on batteries while power constraints affect passive devices, like passive RFID tags, that must be connected to a host device to operate. Security attacks and relevant countermeasures that are correlated to power analysis are also considered in hardware designs. – Software implementations typically only require a microprocessor to operate. The main design goals are the reduction of memory and processing requirements of the cipher. Implementations are optimized for throughput and power savings. Portability is their main advantage over hardware implementations. – Hybrid schemes combine the two approaches exploiting the best features from both. Hardware implements the basic cipher functionality and software performs the data and communication manipulation. A common practice is the design of cryptographic co-processors. The throughput is mostly affected by the communication bandwidth between hardware and software components. Hybrid implementations target on specific communication applications, like RFID tags, portable devices and Internet servers. Lightweight and ultra-lightweight ciphers usually offer 80 to 128 bit security [12]. 80 bit security is considered adequate for constrained devices [23], like 4- bit micro-controllers and RFID tags, while 128 bits is typical for mainstream applications [1]. For one way authentication, 64 to 80 bit security would suffice [21]. Three main approaches are followed in implementing lightweight ciphers. In the first case, researchers try to improve the performance of well-known and well-studied ciphers such as AES and DES. A state of the art AES [1] hardware implementation uses 2400 GE and is used as a benchmark for newer ciphers. In the second case, re-searchers design and implement new ciphers, specific for this domain. PRESENT [2] is such an example implemented for lightweight and ultra-lightweight cryptography and is one of the first ciphers that offer a 1000 GE implementation for ultra-constrained devices. In the third case, researchers mix features of several ciphers that are well studied and their individual properties are known. The absence of decryption is another factor that can reduce the requirements of such ciphers, especially for ultra-lightweight cryptography. Hummingbird-2 [13] is a combination of cipher and protocol and adopts this strategy. This approach is suitable for devices that need only one way authentication. Furthermore, some ciphers like KTANTAN [14] propose that the key should be hard-wired on the device to further reduce the GE due to the absence of key generation operations the two variants [15]. Other traditional ciphers that are investigated in this field are AES [1] Camellia [62], CLEFIA [16] and IDEA [51]. Camellia is approved for use by the ISO/IEC and the projects NESSIE and CRYPTREC. The hardware implementation exceeds the 3000 GE bound while the software implementation is fast. CLEFIA is a 128-bit block size cipher and uses 128-, 192- and 256-bits keys. It was designed by SONY and is highly efficient both in hardware and software. It is standardized in ISO 29192-2. IDEA is used in PGP v2.0 and performs well in embedded software. PRESENT [12] is a milestone in LWC and the comparison unit for lightweight ciphers. It is 128-bit block size cipher and uses 80- and 128-bits keys. It is standardized in ISO 29192-2 and is efficient in both hardware and software.